In this video we're learning how to define our own functions function definitions have four main parts.
We'll look at the syntax of functions and the next slide.
But for now let's look at what these parts are.
The function has to have a name the name of the function follows the same rules we use for naming variables
function names should be meaningful and provide the reader the intent of the function.
For example a function called func one and another function called func to maybe OK when teaching functions
in my slides.
But what if I read some production code with function names like that I'd have no idea what these functions
are doing based on those names functions perform operations.
So usually you see function names as verb or verb phrases.
This is it always the case but it's a good habit to get into the second part of a function is the parameter
list.
This is the list of variables that the function expects from you when you call it.
For example if you're calling a function that adds to integers then the two integers are in the parameter
list.
Sometimes functions don't need any parameters at all.
Suppose I have a function that simply displays hello or a function that returns a system time.
To me these functions can be called with an empty parameter list of functions have the ability to return
information to the caller of the function in order to return information we must specify the type of
information.
So I might return a boolean or an integer or a double or a string.
Also it's possible that a function returns nothing.
For example if I need a function to just display Hello I really don't expect anything back from that
function.
In this case we say that the return type is the keyword void.
Finally functions have bodies.
These are statements to be executed and they're enclosed in curly braces.
You've already seen an example of this in the main function.
So as you can see a function definition is pretty logical.
The name of the function where it expects what it returns and what it does.
Let's see how this looks in C++ syntax.
Here we have a simple function definition.
Notice the name of the function is function underscore name and after the function name we have open
and closed parentheses.
In this case this function expects no parameters.
So there's nothing inside the parentheses.
This function returns an integer.
We specify that by providing the type of the return value before the function name.
Finally we have the body of the function which consists of statements inside curly braces.
You can see that this is the same syntax as we've used in our main function.
Of course we can have functions that return nothing.
Expect many parameters and so forth.
The syntax for all of them is very regular and exactly what you would expect.
Let's see another one.
In this case we have the same function named function name.
But this time it expects exactly one parameter.
That parameter is an integer type and it's available for us to use in the body of the function.
In this example we have a function that returns nothing when called.
In this case we provide the key word void before the function name.
This tells the compiler that there is no return type with void functions we can still have simple return
statements in the body of the function but they're totally optional and not often written.
If there is no return statement it's understood that the function returns after the last statement is
executed.
Pretty simple syntax.
Let's look at one more in this example we see a function definition for function name that expects multiple
parameters.
In this case the function expects two parameters an integer and a standard string when the function
is called.
These two parameters must be provided as arguments in the same order as specified in the parameter list.
Suppose we're going to write a function that displays hello followed by an end line.
Every time it's call we could easily define that function as follows the function name is say hello.
It expects no parameters and returns nothing in the body of the function.
We have an output statement that just displays Hello.
Notice that in this case there is no return statement required since the function doesn't return anything.
Once the say hello function is defined we can call it from Main or from any other function.
In this example you see the function say hello defined above and you also see that it's being called
by the main function below.
This program will display Hello.
In this example we're calling to say hello function ten times inside a for loop and the main function
will display Hello 10 times once per line.
Of course we can define as many functions as we need in our applications to help modularize our program.
In this case I'm defining three functions say world.
Say hello and Main.
Execution always begins with the main function.
So in this case main calls say hello.
So we execute say hello and we display hello to the console but then say hello calls say world and we
display world.
So this program displays Hello World to the console.
Here's the same example with some other output statement sprinkled in.
Again execution always begins with the main function.
So in this case main calls say hello.
So we execute say hello.
Remember that when say hello is finished we need to complete the code in main So we display hello to
the console then say hello calls.
Say world.
And when say world is done we complete the code and say hello.
So we execute SeaWorld and it displays word to the console followed by by from say world.
Then we go back to where we left off and say hello and execute by from say hello.
Then we go back to where we left off and main and execute by remain in our program terminates.
You can walk through this code you'll see exactly what's happening there is one caveat about function
definitions.
The compiler must know the function details that is the function name the parameters and so forth before
the function is called.
So look at the simple example.
I'm calling say hello in main but the compiler hasn't seen the definition of say hello yet.
In this case you'll get a compiler error telling you that say hello has not been declared in this scope.
We'll talk about how to solve this issue with function prototypes in the next video.
But before we do that let's head over to the idea and write a few functions.
Ok so I mean the ID.
I mean the section 11 workspace in the function definitions project.
What I want to do here is I want to write a program that calculates the area of a circle and the volume
of a cylinder.
Pretty easy calculations.
But I want to break everything up into functions that we define.
We create our own user defined functions.
And this is what I want my main to look like to simple function calls area of the circle volume of the
cylinder.
That's it.
Now within those functions we can prompt the user Trenche of the radius the height whatever else we
need.
OK.
So let's get started let's write that area circle function first.
Now in this case I don't want to pass anything into the function or return anything from the function.
This function is simply going to ask the user to cut it to enter the radius of the circle.
It's going to call another function that will actually calculate the area and it will print the result.
OK so let's write that function.
We'll start with voyde since it returns nothing and the name of the function is area of the circle.
That's it.
Simple as that.
Nothing in the parameter list right now because we're not passing anything in as you can see here in
the call.
OK so what do we need.
What we need to ask the user for the radius of the circle right.
So we need a variable here and we'll just call it radius and double is perfect we'll initialize it to
zero.
And most say it will prompt the user will put a new line at the beginning.
Well just say enter the radius of the circle
that's it and we'll read the input into the variable we just created.
You can see this pattern happening over and over again.
It's pretty standard.
OK.
Now what do I want to do.
Well now I want to call another function that actually calculates the area that function again you remember
the area for a circle is pi squared.
That function needs to know the radius in order to calculate the area.
Let's write the function call first.
We'll say something like C out and we'll do something like.
Again the area of a circle with radius whatever they typed in which was radius in this case and then
we'll say is now what do we do.
Now we need to call a function that actually calculates that area gives me back the double that I can
display here.
So let's call that function Kelk area circle and that function expects the radius.
Right.
And it will produce a new line at the end.
And really that's it for this function.
We clean that space up right here.
Right.
So now we need to write the other function this function right here.
Area of the circle.
Obviously we need to return something from that function right.
The function is calculating the area so it needs to return something to me so that I can display it
here.
So in this case I want to return a double let's call it Calgarian circle.
And what does it expect it expects the radius which is a double
What does it do now it just returns pi are squared right.
Simple as that.
But we haven't defined PI let's define it up here we'll say Konst double PI and we'll set it to three
point 1 4 1 5 9.
That's close enough for this example.
So there's my pieds constant which is what we want we don't want to be changing pi.
And in the function body here all we need to do really is to say return pi times the radius squared.
We could use the power function or we could just say radius times radius which is what I'll do right
here.
That's it.
That should do it.
Let's walk through this.
We call area the circle transfers control over to this function.
We have a radius variable right here we're asking the user to enter the radius of the circle.
We're reading it and then we're passing that value into this function.
Calculate the area of the circle and it's going to calculate the area of the circle and return that
value back to me which I'm going to print right in here.
Now I could store that into a variable or do anything I want with it.
Right.
So let's run this and test it out.
Whoops I mean come at top volume of the cylinder because we haven't written that one yet.
That's the next one.
Right.
So the radius of the circle 2.5.
It says here the area of a circle with radius twelve point five is for ninety point seventy three.
OK.
Obviously we'd want to test that to be sure that that's correct.
And that's pretty much it.
Right.
Pretty straightforward.
Now let's write this one right here the volume of a cylinder.
Well how do you calculate the volume of a cylinder.
Well the volume of a cylinder is pi r squared times the height of the cylinder right.
And I'm not using any units he can think of this as inches or centimeters or meters wherever you like.
It doesn't really matter too much.
So we need to write this volume cylinder function.
This is going to be very similar to the area circle function right.
Is this going to prompt the user for some information and this case is going to prompt the user for
the radius of the cylinder and the height of the cylinder.
So let's write it will say void volume of a cylinder.
And the reason that that's popping up in the completion is because they had that in there before and
I guess it remembered which is kind of handy.
All right.
So we need the radius of the cylinder.
It will initialize that to zero.
And we also need the height of the cylinder wall initialized to zero as well.
So let's ask the user to just cut and copy and paste this to save a little typing time.
So what is the radius of the cylinder in this case.
And we'll read that into radius
perfect.
And then what would you hear is we'll copy these guys as well.
And we'll ask them for the height of the cylinder
into the height of the cylinder will read that into the height variable.
So now we've got everything we need.
So what do we do now.
Well let's do the put statement right.
We'll say see out and we'll say the volume of a cylinder with radius
and will provide the radius value here and then will say something like.
And height and will put the height here.
And finally we'll just say just like before is now we need to call a function which you haven't written
yet.
Right.
So let's call it calque volume of the cylinder will write that function in a minute.
Now what do we pass into it when we need to pass in the radius and the height doesn't matter what order
you put it in.
But that's the way you have to provide the variables.
I could have set height radius and just sent in the correct ones.
So in this case I'm going to write that's what expects a radius first and then the height and then we'll
print a new line at the end and that'll be it.
OK.
So that's where we're at with this function.
It's finished now so we've cleaned up some of the space right here.
Now what we need to do is write that function cap volume cylinder.
So let's do that and we'll do it right here.
We'll say I sure will do it a couple of minds up right under the other calculation right here.
So we'll say double because it returns a double calc volume of the cylinder.
It expects the radius which is a double and it expects the height which is also a double.
Right.
So in this case what do we do we return.
PI radius squared
times the height and that gives the volume of the cylinder.
That should do it.
Calling volume Szilard announcer would do it two times.
Now we get the area of the circle What's that say.
Again this is say 10 and that's correct.
That's what we expect right pi times 100.
So what's the radius of the cylinder this time want to say it's twelve point one.
And what's the height.
Say it's a really tall cylinder twenty five point two.
So the volume of the cylinder with radius twelve point one in height twenty five point two is eleven
91.
We just need to put a little space after it is there.
Cannot is one thing that we could do to make this a little better.
You'll notice that this calculation right here Pyaar squared.
We're doing it again right here.
So what we could do is we could refactor this code just sort a little better and we could say return
and we can do we can calculate the area of the circle and pass in the radius to it and then multiply
that by the height that we were reducing that function.
So hopefully you can see what's going on here cap the volume of a cylinder is the areas the area of
the circle times its height.
So we may as well just call that function to do it for us.
You can see the repeated code.
OK.
So there you go that's it we've created.
And let me run that again just to be sure that we're working correctly.
See twelve point one.
So what's the radius of the cylinder ten point two.
And let's say it's thirty point one.
And there we go.
OK so that's it.
You can see how really straightforward it is.
And the nice thing about this is when you read your code you can see your main.
It's really easy to follow right before in our main We had all of this stuff in there.
Now we're just seeing area of the circle.
OK.
And remember that Macaulay's as many times as I want in this case it's going to ask me two times that
I could put them in loops I can do anything I want.
So what's the radius of a circle ten point one.
OK.
It's asking me again as I called it again.
Ten point two this time that it goes to the radius of the cylinder.
OK so let's finish this off this video.
You can see how easy it is to create these user defined functions.
And this is really what you want.
You want your program to be modularized and have these small well-defined units that do what you'd want
it to do and just do one thing really really well.